# SLA for Open API Initiative Specification

**SLA4OAI** is an open source standard for describing SLA in APIs.

Based on the standards proposed by the [OAI](https://openapis.org/specification), SLA4OAI builds on top of it to add
an optional profile for defining SLA (Service Level Agreements) over the APIs.

This SLA definition in a neutral vendor flavor will allow fostering innovation in the area where APIs expose and documents its SLA,
API Management tools can import and measure such key metrics and composed SLAs for composed services aggregated way in a standard way.

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL"
in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt).


## Revision History

|Version  | Date         | Notes                  |
|:------- |:------------ |:---------------------- |
| 1.0.0     | 2020-11-16 | Initial draft.         |


### 1. Extension Format

SLA extension can be mapped in an external YAML or JSON file. The OpenAPI specification main document (inside the `info` section) can link to SLA defitions using the standard extension and `$ref` linking mechanims:

```yaml
openapi: 3.0
info:
  x-sla:
    $ref: ./sla.yml
```


## Base Example

```yaml
sla: 1.0
context:
  id: petstore-sample
  type: plans
  api:
    $ref: ./petstore-service.yml
  provider: ISAGroup
```

### 2. Header

SLA defitions (following the same guidelines applied in OpenAPI) starts with describing the document type `sla` and the version following [Semantic Versioning](https://semver.org/) conventions.

### 3. Context

Context block provide metadata to describe the type of SLA information to be provided.

- `id` provide a unique name (_mandatory_).
- `type` can take the values `plans` or `aggrement` (_mandatory_).
- `provider` describe the organization providing the service (_optional_).

### 4. Metrics

```yaml
metrics:
  animalTypes:
    type: integer
    format: int64
    description: Number of different animal types.
  resourceInstances:
    type: integer
    format: int64
    description: Number of pet resources
  requests:
    type: "int64"
    description: "Number of requests"
```

Metrics sections describes the relevant tecnical indcators and business metrics for the SLA.

There could be pure technical ones like response time, throughtput, or band-width but also business ones like sales per period, usage metrics, etc.

For each metric to be defined:

- `type` and `format` describes the data-type following same conventions as OpenAPI 3.x.
- `description` provides a label for the metric been defined.
- `unit` (when applicable) describes the units to be used for the measure. e.g. `ms`, `req/s`, etc.

### 5. Pricing

Pricing block describes a price model fon an especific plan. Describing the `cost`, the `currency` (expresed in [ISO 4217](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_4217) form) and the billing period `billing`.

```yaml
pricing:
  cost: 0
  currency: EUR
  billing: monthly
```

### 6. Availability

```yaml
availability: R/00:00:00Z/15:00:00Z
```

Availiability, when applicable, describes a time-windows where the API is available (using the [ISO 8601 Time Intervals](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601#Time_intervals) format).

### 7. Quota Limits

Quotas limits are resource contraints imposed globally (e.g. _max. disk usage_) or scoped to *static* temporal windows (e.g. _holidays as 24 labout days per year_ - in a period of a *natural year*).

For a formal definition of Rates and Quotas see [1].

```yaml
rates:
  /pets/{id}:
    get:
      requests:
        - max: 1
          period: secondly
```

Quotas section describes limits to endpoints based on expression over metrics. Samples:

- maximum 10 request per minute by account to `GET /pets`
- maximum 40 request per hour by tenant to `GET /pets`
- maximum 3 request per minute by account to `POST /pets`
- maximum of 5 resource instances on `POST /pets`
- maximum of 2 animal types on `POST /pets`

### 8. Rate Limits

Rates section describes limits to endpoints based on expression measured with respect to metrics for a *dynamic* window time.

```yaml
rates:
  /pets/{id}:
    get:
      requests:
        - max: 1
          period: secondly
```


### 10. Plans

Describes different plans including different prices and level of service. Level of service can be improved or limited depending of the plan.

```yaml
plans:
  free:
    rates:
      /pets/{id}:
        get:
          requests:
            - max: 1
              period: secondly
  pro:
    availability: R/00:00:00Z/23:59:59Z
    pricing:
      cost: 50
    quotas:
      /pets:
        get:
          requests:
            - max: 20
              period: minutely
            - max: 100
              period: hourly
        post:
          requests:
            - max: 100
              period: minutely
          resourceInstances:
            - max: 500
          animalTypes:
            - max: 5
```

### 11. Plans application

First `base` keyword is proposed as the common base plan. All limits in base plan apply to all plans.

Then, a specific plan inherits definitions from `base` and can override any limit to make it more concrete or relaxed.

### 12. Keywords

- `base` is used as the common properties applicable to all plans (can be overriden).

## References

1. An Analysis of RESTful APIs Offerings
in the Industry. A. Gamez-Diaz(B), P. Fernandez, and A. Ruiz-Cortes. In M. Maximilien et al. (Eds.): ICSOC 2017, LNCS 10601, pp. 589–604, 2017. DOI: [10.1007/978-3-319-69035-3_43](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-69035-3_43)

2. The Role of SLA in the API Insdustry. SLA4OAI-TC Members. [10.1145/3338906.3340445](https://doi.org/10.1145/3338906.3340445)
